
# Dust-MCMC

MCMC sampling for metallicity determination of individual absorption components
using depletion strengths for each component as priors.


## Generate test data

A test dataset can be generated by the following script:

    python simulate_data.py


which takes as input either an input CSV file with the following three parameters:
[M/H], logNH, [Zn/Fe]. One row for each component to simulate (see [sim_input.1.csv](sim_input.1.csv) for an example).
From these three parameters, a set of metal column densities are generated following
the metallicity, HI column and depletion strength.

If no input file is given, a random set of components is simulated.
The number of components to simulate can be set by passing the option "-n":

    python simulate_data.py -n 4


for 4 components.


By default, 2 components are simulated with random parameters drawn from the default
ranges of metallicity, logN(H) and [Zn/Fe]. To check the parameter ranges, run:

    python simulate_data.py -h



This generated file can then be passed to the MCMC sampler.


## Generating a large grid of test data

Using the script `simulate_many.py` you can generate many random realisations with varying number of
components and elements. To generate a default set of all elements with 2 components for 100 systems,
run the command:

    python simulate_many.py

The simulated column density tables will be saved to the folder `data/`.

You can vary the number of components using the `-n` option, and the elements to simulate using the `-e` option:

    python simulate_many.py 200 -n 4 -e Si S Zn Fe Ti --dir data_N4

This command will generate 200 systems with 4 random components only including the elements silicon, sulphur, zinc, iron and titanium. The output files will be saved in the `data_N4` folder.


## Column density table format
The column density tables are CSV files following the format of the [test file](HD62542_coldens.csv).
Each row corresponds to one element which must be stated as the first column (column `ion`).
The second and third columns are the total column densities and their uncertainties (in log units; 
column names: `total` and `total_err`). The remaining columns provide the column densities for individual 
columns and their uncertainties (column names: `comp1`, `comp1_err`, `comp2`, `comp2_err` etc.). 
Not all components need to have measurements for all elements. But all elements must have non-zero 
uncertainties (i.e., not limits are included).


## Running the MCMC sampling

The script `depletion_mcmc.py` runs the sampler for 5000 iterations with 100 walkers 
and discards the first 500 samples.

    python depletion_mcmc.py datafile.csv

These sampling parameters can be changed in the script using the `-s` option for number
of steps/iterations, `-n` for the number of walkers, 
and `-b` for the number of 'burn-in' steps to discard:

    python depletion_mcmc.py datafile.csv -s 1000 -b 200 -n 200


By default the depletion sequences are fitted for each component and the uncertainty on the depletion
strength ([Zn/Fe]-fit, or _D_) is used as a prior. The depletion is then allowed to vary within this
prior while sampling the metallicities. If instead you want to fix the depletion strengths to their
best-fit values, run the script with the `-f` option.

The hydrogen column density is distributed randomly among all components for each sample. This is done 
by drawing a random weight for each component between 1 and _w_ (100 by default). 
The weights are normalized such that they sum to 1 and each component is then assigned that fraction
of the total hydrogen column density.
Depending on the value of _w_, components can have more or less weight (statistically speaking).
By lower _w_, individual components will have more similar weight, whereas a larger number will have
more diverse weights on average. This value can be changed by setting the option `-w`:

    python depletion_mcmc.py datafile.csv -w 10


To see all the options from the command line, run:

    python depletion_mcmc.py -h


The results from the MCMC are saved to the directory `output/` by default. This can be changed by setting
the `-o` option. The code saves:

    - the MCMC chains as a numpy array (.npy) and plots the chains for each
    variable (the dashed vertical lines show the _burn-in_),

    - the best-fit parameters as a txt file,

    - the fit report,

    - a figure showing the depletion sequences for each component and the total columns

    - and a figure showing the parameter covariance and marginalized histograms.
    In the histogram plots, the best-fit value is indicated
    as the blue lines, whereas red lines indicate the input values if running on simulated data.

All files are named according to their input filename to keep track of everything.

